:blogpost: true
:date: 2023-08-06
:author: Richard Darst
:category: rse, internal


The Aalto RSE hiring process
============================

This post describes the hiring process of Aalto RSE.  The goal is to
make hiring more equitable by providing the background information so
that everyone can apply successfully.  For those not applying to us,
it might still provide some valuable insight about how to market your
skills as a PhD making a sideways career move.  What's said here may
not apply to every organization, but it might give you some things to
think about.


Background
----------

`Aalto RSE <https://scicomp.aalto.fi/rse/>`__ has usually hired people
who have postdoc experience and will transition to a more applied
software/data/computing oriented role (as opposed to being focused on
writing papers).  For many people, we are the first experience of job
applications post-degree and thus people have to learn how to present
their skills in a new, non-academic context.

One should start by reading about us - we have lots of information
publicly available about what we do and how we think.  This should be
understood in order for the next steps.


The cover letter
----------------

The cover letter is the most important thing we read, and the first
and most important filter.  It's read before the CV.

At the level we are at, almost everyone's CV and achievements are
effectively equivalent.  Does it matter who got the most fancy papers?
Who has the most awards?  The classes people took?  When most of a
person's knowledge has come from self-study, probably not.  The cover
letter is the chance to interpret your skills in the context of the
job you are applying for.

When reading the cover letter, the first question we ask is "does this
person know what they are applying to and know why they think they are
a good fit?"  (It's always interesting to get letters which clearly
don't understand the job, but on the other hand it's an easy filter.)
The first paragraph should answer this question and that the rest of
the letter will go into detail about why.  Start with the most
important information, don't keep us in suspense.

Beyond that, talk about skills as relevant to the organization.
Discuss special projects, including non-academic ones or random things
that you are interested in.  Our job advertisement specifically gives
you a lot of ideas that you can talk about.  Anything specifically
important to the job should be pointed out here and not just left in
the CV.

If you don't exactly fit the stated job requirements: here is the
chance to explain it.  The job requirement has to say roughly what we
need (to not waste people's time when applying), but there are many
cases where someone with a different experience can accomplish our
actual goal (as said in the job ad or in your background research).  A
person that can say this, and that they are adaptable, can have a very
good chance.

We have adopted some system of anonymous recruiting.  We request that
cover letters are submitted without identifying information (name,
signature, etc) so that one person gives them numbers, and a broader
group tries to take a non-biased look at them.  After this initial
impression, we bring in the rest of the application.  Don't make
assumptions about what the reader will know about your background,
just say it.

The letter should be as short as possible to get the information
across.  One page is usually about the shortest we get, and a bit less
than two pages is typical.  But if it's engaging, we'll read as much
as you write.  Remember, most important information first, don't make
us hunt for things.


The rest of the job application
-------------------------------

The CV serves as non-anonymous reference information, but they are
hard to read and all look pretty similar.  To be honest, we don't
worry that much about the format and contents here: get us basic
factual information in the most efficient way.  For our particular
jobs, non-academic skills such as software/data tools are more
important than scientific articles, etc.   Remember, we are busy
and have plenty of applications, make it easy to read.

Open Science isn't just good for research, it's good for you, too.  If
you can point to public repositories of work you have done, this is
very useful.  Things like Gitlab/Github profiles with activity and
your own projects, data you have released, etc.  They don't have to be
perfect - something is better than nothing.  The best case would be a
few projects which are well-done (and you know it and point them out
to us), and plenty more stuff that may be of lower quality to show you
can get simple stuff done simply.  Not everyone is fortunate to have a
field where they can practice open science throughout their career,
but even publishing a project or two before they apply for a job with
us is very useful.

Despite what the previous section said, we do try to dig through
applications that seem on-topic but don't say everything we are looking
for, to give them the most fair shot we can.


The filtering process
---------------------

We always need to heavily filter the list down.  Some relevant
filtering includes:

* Do they know what job they are applying for?  Can they connect their
  skills to the job?

* Have they touched on the main points in our job advertisement and the
  linked "`Become a RSE
  <https://scicomp.aalto.fi/rse/become-a-rse/>`__" page?  Some of the
  most important funtamental skills include basic Linux
  skills, programming (at least one language relatively well, ability
  to learn quickly), general data handling skills, any other

* Are they interested in teaching and mentoring?  Do they know what
  kind of teaching and mentoring they do?

* Is there enough knowledge about the research process?

* Any relevant skills about this call's particular topic (if there is
  any)?

* How do their skills match skills which we are currently missing?

The recruitment team makes passes over and we discuss how to filter
down.  We try to get a good variety of candidates.


Interviews
----------

Our actual interviews are not designed to be stressful.  We have some
prepared questions and go through them in a friendly manner.  You have
a chance to ask questions to use at the beginning and end (and any
other time too).  The questions are designed to hear about your
experiences and not trick or test you.

We don't currently ask technical challenge questions.  The number of
things which you'd need to know is so broad, it's more important that
you can learn things quickly.  Since we usually interview relatively
advanced people, we can instead look at existing projects they have
done and check references, without having to do a technical
challenge.  This may be updated in the future.

We want to respond to people as soon as possible, but there's a simple
fact: we don't want to tell anyone "no" until we are very sure we have
an acceptance (we don't want to tell someone "no" and then hire them
later), and we have very many qualified candidates.  So there is often
an unfortunately long delay in hearing back.  We hope that everyone
knows within a month, though (and ideally ~2 weeks if all goes well).


If you don't make it
--------------------

We get a relatively large number of applications, with a lot of good
people.  So far (before 2023), we have been hiring at a relatively
high level - researchers with postdoc experience who have been some
sort of RSE-like experience with helping others with research (beyond
only focusing on making papers for themselves) and technology.
Don't let this discourage you.  There are many qualified applications,
so if you don't get selected, that doesn't mean that you were
unqualified.  We look at everyone, regardless of their level, for
every position.  The fit to our particular job is more important that
anything else, so keep trying until you get the right fit - it's just
a numbers game.


Old job application text
------------------------

[old application text to be inserted here]
