:blogpost: true
:date: 2023-04-16
:author: Richard Darst
:category:


SciComp Kickstart - 2023 plans and yearly strategy
==================================================

It's time for our "kickstart course" - let's talk about what that is,
why, and why you might want to attend.

The full name is "Introduction to scientific computing and HPC"
(high-performance computing), and it used to be called "HPC Kickstart"
and was taught without the first day, thus the short name "kickstart"
we still use.  Some years day 1 had a different name, but was still
taught together with days 2-3 as a package.



Topics of SciComp Kickstart
---------------------------

**Day 1** is not about high-performance computing things, but the
basic skills needed to do scientific computing: things like Linux
usage, data management, the types of tools available for different
problems.  For almost anyone doing any kind of programming/scientific
computing kind of work, regardless of background.  These kind of
skills aren't taught in academic degree programs.  We teach these on
day 1 because otherwise, new researchers have to learn from each other
or re-invent.

**Days 2 and 3 are about high-performance computing, more precisely
basic cluster usage** (with a focus of the basics).  This is focused
on the kinds of tools our community usually uses.


The topics are refined after many years of both teaching and support
of junior researchers.  Because of the way academic careers work (much
diversity of paths), these topics (even day 1) aren't just for new
researchers but everyone can find something to learn or brush up on.



Yearly schedule
---------------

For the past years, we have been trying to keep up this yearly summer
schedule.  This usually happens the first full workweek:

* **Monday:** HR introductions, other formalities for new summer
  workers - many departments seem to something like this.  This may
  happen early than Monday of the kickstart week, since sometimes that
  comes too late.
* **Tuesday afternoon:** Kickstart course day 1, the general scientific
  computing introduction.  Applicable to everyone doing scientific
  computing.
* **Wednesday-Thursday afternoons:** The HPC cluster usage part, which fewer
  people will attend compared to Tuesday.
* **Friday:** we don't have scheduled programs on Fridays, but
  sometimes there are communities who host advanced tutorials here
  about what their local users need.  In 2023, there is at least an
  advanced GPU course then.



Future
------

In the past, we have tried to coordinate with the department HRs to
avoid any other events, and have been mostly successful.  In 2023, we
tried extra hard to do this coordination early and thought we were
successful.  Unfortunately, the CS department scheduled the summer
event on Tuesday of the week we have planned.  There have been similar
things in the past and we have adjusted our schedule, but
unfortunately this year, with everyone else coordinated, we have no
option to do that.  **This places CS researchers in an unfortunate
position of choosing between skill and networking for career
development**.

We hope that this blog post can explain our goals to a larger audience
so that we can reach even more people in the future, and avoid these
types of scheduling conflicts.  You can reach us at scip@aalto.fi, and
each spring we reach out to the main departments we know use our
services.
