:blogpost: true
:date: 2023-06-21
:author: Richard Darst
:category:


How we do large course registration
===================================

It's recently been asked how we do registration for large courses, so
this explains it.  This is in particular about our large MOOC-like
livestreamed courses, where we accept registrations from anywhere in
the world.

Basic registration
------------------

Our basic principle is to have a registration form open to the whole
world, and anyone is welcome to sign up.  Registering only promises to
give you emails about the course - the extra things listed below that
provide more interaction are optional and may be restricted to certain
categories.  We also try to put all necessary information onto the
course website (updated each day with the end-of-day / prepare for the
next day info), so that someone can follow along without registering.
This is an explicit goal: the course can be followed for free, without
even giving personal information to us.

And that's basically it.  Follow the course, or don't.  Sign up to get
emails with information or check the website yourself.  No one will
know if you register and don't attend (nor does it take a seat from
anyone else).  It's OK to register just because you are interested and
might follow the material later on (you could call this the
`r-selection strategy
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/R/K_selection_theory>`__: go for number
of registrations, not the percentage who show up).

The basic concept scales to however many people with no extra effort
on our part.



Optional extras
---------------

The above isn't necessarily a very interactive course, so our
registration can be complemented by the following things.  There is no
extra registration form or field based on this: you get a different
version of the email including these if your info (affiliation)
matches the target audiences:

* **Collaborative notes**: this is our core way of interaction.  Our
  anti-troll strategy is to not give the notes document publicly, but
  only for (a) anyone registering or (b) anyone registering from a
  partner.  The live notes are not linked on the course website or
  provided on the stream (though sometimes they get leaked, or we
  straight up provide on the livestream chat).

  People who do *not* have access to the notes can still see them when
  they are shared on the livestream.  They also have access to the
  archive notes (read-only archived version after each day), which are
  linked on the course website.

  We've usually done (a) in many courses.  We've never had a problem
  with collaborative notes trolls so far.

  The notes are still an r-strategy: as many people as want them can
  get them, and low attendance is OK.

* **Zoom exercise room**: based on registration email, we offer to
  people at Aalto and other partners the opportunity for more
  interaction in Zoom.  This is something for live support during the
  exercise times of the course.

  In practice, there usually aren't that many people that are in Zoom,
  and handling all the questions we might get is pretty easy.  Thus,
  this is still an r-strategy (offer to as many people as possible
  *within the selected group* and see who comes).  It's possible we
  would have to change this sometime.

  Usually, this would be offered for anyone from a country of one of
  the organizing partners (the usual suspects are Finland, Sweden,
  Norway).

* **In-person exercise session**: Offered to those from Aalto (or
  really, from all Finnish universities).  There have been anywhere
  from ~3 people to a busy room of ~15 (for a course with hundreds of
  registrations).  We have always made this a "drop-in" thing with no
  special sign-up needed, and supermarket snacks provided (so that we
  can buy plenty cheaply, save them, and not have to worry about
  no-shows).

  Others in other locations could easily do this, too.

  So far, this has also been a "as many people as possible" thing.
  While we've never hit the limit, it might also be self-regulating:
  if it's too busy on one day, the people who least need it wouldn't
  come future days.



What else could be done
-----------------------

These take more work from us and active advance preparation on the
part of the participants, thus are not as scaleable.

* **Teams (organized)**: What we *don't* do in our courses is teams in
  the way that CodeRefinery accomplished in 2020-2021 (which involves
  custom-creating small groups of people with a trained team leader).
  This worked very well when it worked, but is usually beyond the
  amount of coordination time we have for our (Aalto) courses.

  This is definitely a `K-selection strategy
  <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/R/K_selection_theory>`__ (low number,
  high attendance): we need fewer people registered here, there must
  be high attendance (since an empty team is a bad experience for
  other learners and the trained team leader), and it requires lots of
  coordination effort.  We'd hope that the high amount of personal
  effort put into leads to a low no-show rate.

* **Teams (self-organized)**: We also encourage learners to form their
  own teams and work together (like watching and doing exercises
  together in a meeting room).  We know some people do this, but don't
  really have ways to know just how many do so (since we can't rely on
  our polls).  While this is listed on the website, we haven't done
  much to support this otherwise (but interested people could be
  invited to our team leader onboarding sessions).

These *could* be scaled by getting other partners to handle the teams
for their own communities, probably in conjunction with their local
Zoom/In-person/etc.



Sharing registration data
-------------------------

To make some of these possible, we need to share registration data
with others so that they can announce things like local in-person
rooms / Zoom sessions.  What we have said in our privacy notice lately
is during the registration that we may share registrations with
partners for these type of local things, but doesn't scale to many
partners (for data protection reasons).  In practice, this has only
been CodeRefinery partners for the obvious reason, and probably won't
go beyond that.

* **Local partner registration**: When a local partner forwards the
  message to their own audience, they could change the registration
  form to their own, or give *both* registration forms, so they get
  emails both from us and from the local partner.  We still need to
  figure out a way to do this well with the least amount of confusion
  for the audience.

  In practice, signing up for either one or the other would work, so
  it doesn't matter that much.

We also list all local activities on the website, so that the audience
could use the registration forms of these other partners directly.  We
can also mention these partners in our general emails.  This is more
scaleable, since we don't have to worry about sharing personal data,
but also means that some of these opportunities might be missed.
