:blogpost: true
:date: 2023-05-14
:author: Richard Darst
:category: RSE


Research Software Engineer project funding: what's been working
===============================================================

The "Research Software Engineer" service provides technical
collaborators for researchers to complement their scientific
knowledge.  `Read about Aalto RSE here
<https://scicomp.aalto.fi/rse/>`__.  The idea of this service was that
it would be available to everyone, but some projects who made
extensive use would fund it themselves.  We hoped for around 50%
project funding.



Funding in the past
-------------------

When started, the idea was that a lot of the funding for
the RSEs would come from the research projects themselves.  This
hasn't really worked out so well, because a) we accomplish the vast
majority of our projects quickly, in less than a few weeks, and b)
finance would understandably not like to deal with small transactions
for small amounts of time.

In the end, we basically have received only a small amount of the
project funding we would have wanted.  On the other hand, this also
means we have supported a far wider variety of projects than we would
have otherwise.  It also means we are better accomplishing our other
goal: tactical support right where and when it's needed most, with the
least amount of administrative overhead.  This actually better matches
our mission of helping the researchers who need us most.



Future funding prospects
------------------------

For any long projects (more than a month or so), we can still do our
original plan: we can receive funding from grants (or basic funding)
to do certain projects.  This is usually 40-80% of the time, spread
out over more than a month (and it can also be bursty: lots of work at
some times, waiting for your parts at other times).  We have done this
for projects, and we know we can do it in the future.

But there's another thing that has worked well: **retainers**.  You
have extra funding that needs to be used?  You know your group needs
support but you can't make it a specific project?  Hire RSEs on
long-term retainers and we're there for you as needed.  **You will
always get priority for all the quick questions you have** (in
:doc:`/help/garage` or otherwise), we will more quickly make time for
your medium projects, and can attend your other group meetings, and so
on.  As your team has time, we'll make high-impact improvements here
and there.  This could be (for example) anywhere from 10-40% time over
a long period.

We *have* worked out how to do the above with Finance.  As for as
external finders are concerned, our staff count as researchers, so we
can use any funding you might have.



Why are our projects so short?
------------------------------

This is a valid questions.  Compared to many RSE groups, we seem to be
focusing on many small questions for a broad audience that knows a lot
about the problems they need to solve.  Thus, we can come in to
something already set up well, provide help, and mostly back off and
be available for maintenance long-term.  The units that fund us
(schools, departments) have been happy with this, so we've kept it up.
On the other hand, we are pretty fast.  There have been projects where
a summer worker was going to be hired, that we could end up doing
(learning the framework + all the main tasks) in two weeks.  The way
we work together as a team also makes things quite fast.  Thus, a
project has to be quite deep in order to exceed a month of work.
